---
layout: post
title: Arrays.
description: A guide to arrays - Part 2 of my Computer Science tutorials.
date: 2019-05-09 11:12:00-0400
---

# Arrays
---
## Brief Overview

In Java, there is a very useful tool and data structure called an array. In essence, an array is
a collection of the same data type, of a fixed size. Arrays are very useful, when storing large quantities
of data (i.e. instead of declaring 100 new variables to store 100 int values, you can declare one array
variable to hold all these values).

In this tutorial, I will show you how to declare, instantiate, and manipulate arrays.

## Declaration

In Java, to easily manipulate arrays in a program, you must create a new reference variable. During this declaration, you will also need to
specify the type of data you are storing. The following is an example of the basic declaration format:

{% highlight java linenos %}
          yourDataTypeHere [] theNameOfTheArrayReference;
          yourDataTypeHere theNameOfTheArrayReference [];
{% endhighlight %}

Although both ways work, note that the first method is often preferred to make code look cleaner.

## Instantiating

To instantiate an array in Java, you must create a new array object using the "new" operator. As well,
you will need to specify the size of the array. Note that in Java, you cannot alter the size
of an array once created. You can however, redirect the varaible's object reference to a new array of a
different size.

Additionally, there is also an alternate form of creating a new array. This method involves listing every element
inside a list, separated by commas, surrounded by braces {}. This is called an initializer list.
Note: the data types of each element must be consistent. The following are examples of the two ways to create an array:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    // 1 - using the new operator
    arrayDataType [] theNameOfTheArrayReference = new arrayDataType[sizeOfArray];
    // this will create a new array "new arrayDataType[sizeOfArray]"
    // this will make the reference varaible, theNameOfTheArrayReference, point
    //    to the newly made array in computer memory
    //2 - using an initializer list
    arrayDataType[] theNameOfTheArrayReference2 = {element1, element2, ... elementn};
    // this will do the exact same thing as method 1 for the array object
    // this method is often used when there is a pre-made list that is to be used in the program.
{% endhighlight %}

Let's look at a few real life demos. Here, I'm going to make 3 different arrays.

- an array of Strings, length of 10
- an array of doubles, length of 15
- an array of characters, length of 3, given pre-set values of 'A', 'B', 'C' 
  
{% highlight java linenos %}
    // array of Strings
    String [] stringArray = new String[10];
    // array of doubles
    double [] doubleArray = new double[15];
    // array of characters
    char [] charArray = {'A','B','C'};
{% endhighlight %}

## Traversal

In Java, an element/value inside an array is accessed using the following syntax: theNameOfTheArrayReference[index],
which holds the value of the element at the integer index. Note: indices in Java arrays start at 0, meaning
the first element in an array would be arrayReference[0] and the last element would be arrayReference[arrayReference.length-1].

Note that attempting to access an array of an index that is out of bounds will cause Java to throw
an `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`. For example, if the array length is set as 5, accessing array[5] or above, or array[-1] or below,
will throw `ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException`.

Before we move on, let's touch quickly on what the `.length` is.

In Java, the arrays contain an attribute/field called length. You may have encountered a similar
`length()` method when you learned about Strings.
      
### .length vs .length()

When using the method length() for Strings, an accessor method is called in the Stirng class, and returns the value of the String
object’s length (in characters). (.length) however, directly accesses the final variable value of the array size. Since an array’s
length can never be changed after initialization, the length variable can be exposed and accessible without any unwanted side effects.
      

The following is a class which demonstrates summing up all the elements inside an integer array.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class SumExemplar{
        public static void main(String [] args){
        int [] listOfNumbers = {1, 2, 3, 4, 10};
        int total = 0;
        
          // sums up all the elements
          for(int i = 0; i < listOfNumbers.length; i++){
            total += listOfNumbers[i];
          }
    
          System.out.println(total + " is the sum of all the numbers");
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

   
## The foreach Loop - Array

The foreach loop, or otherwise called an enhanced for loop, is a form of for loop
that sequentially traverses an array, without the need of an index variable. The following
is an example program that outputs the values inside an array of integers.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class ForeachTest{
        public static void main(String [] args){
        int [] list = {1,2,3,4,5};
            for(int value : list){  // the int value is assigned to the next sequential element inside the array
                System.out.println(value);
            }
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}

It is important to note, that foreach loops cannot alter the original contents of the array when dealing with primitive data types.
However, when storing objects in an array (non-primitive), it is possible to mutate attributes of the object using helper methods.
For example, the following code will NOT change the values inside the original array:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class Foreachdemo{
        public static void main(String [] args){
            int [] list = {1,2,3,4,5};
            for(int value:list){
                value +=2;  // attempts to increase each elements value by 2
            }

            // output the original array
            for(int i = 0; i< list.length-1; i++){
              System.out.println(list[i]);
            }
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}
        
## Passing in arrays as Parameters

It is important to remember that an array is an object. This means that when an array is passed in as a parameter,
its object reference is being passed in. This means that this method can access and alter the original array.
     

For example:
{% highlight java linenos %}
    public static void addTwos(int [] array){
        for(int i = 0; i < array.length; i++){
        array[i] += 2;
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}
would end up incrementing all the values in the array by 2.

    
# 2-D Arrays
   
## Brief Overview

Think of 2d arrays as an array of arrays. Yes, you read that right. That's pretty much it! 2-D arrays are treated
a very similar way when traversing and instantiating.
   
## Declaration and Initialization

The declaration and initialization of a 2-D array is very similar to 1-D arrays. Instead of having one set of [],
you need two to indicate that it is 2-D. As well, there must be two size specifications. Take a look:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    int [] [] 2dArray1 = new int [10][20];      // this makes a new 2d array object of size 10 rows by 20 columns
    double 2dArray2 [] [] = new int [15][25];   // this makes a new 2d array object of size 15 rows by 20 columns
    {% raw %}char [] [] 2dArray3 = {{'a','b','c'}, {'d','e','f'}, {'g','h','i'}}; {% endraw %} // this uses an initializer list to declare a 3x3 array
{% endhighlight %}
       
To access specific array elements, two index indicators must be used: one for row number and one for column (i.e.
arrayName[i][j] would be the reference variable for the element in the i+1th row, and the j+1th row). Remember that indices start at 0!
   

## Traversal

When traversing through a 2-D array, there must be two for loops: one to traverse the rows, and one to traverse the
columns.
      
Let's look at the code:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class 2DArray{
        public static void main(String [] args){
            int [][] array = new int [5][10];
            int temp = 0;
            for (int i = 0; i < array.length; i++){
                for (int j = 0; j < array[0].length; j++){
                    array[i][j] = temp;
                    temp++;
                }
            }
        }
    }
{% endhighlight %}       
          

This sets initial values of the array from 0 to 50, from left to right.
      
## The foreach Loop - 2D Array
 
It is slightly different when using a foreach loop for a 2-D array. We need to use one foreach loop to hold the array value of the
rows, while using another foreach loop to access these values inside each array. Take a look:
{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class Foreach2DTester{
        public static void main(String [] args){
            int [] [] demolist= {% raw %} {{1,2,3}, {4,5,6}, {7,8,9}}; {% endraw %}
            for(int [] rowList : demoList){
                for(int element : rowList){
                    System.out.println(element + 2);
                }
            }
        }
    }  
{% endhighlight %}      
            
This code will output the values of the 2-D array, left to right, each element value increased by 2.

# ArrayLists
    
## Brief Overview

Once you have mastered arrays, ArrayLists should come very easily for you.
      
In Java, ArrayLists come from a part of the java.util class library.
To use ArrayLists in a program, at the very top (before the class), you must use the
following import statement:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    import java.util.ArrayList;
    // alternatively,
    import java.util.*;
{% endhighlight %}
            
     
In essence, you could treat an ArrayList as an array, but with enhanced capabilities.
Some of these include a dynamic size and practical methods. Overall, you can look at them
as dynamic arrays. The advantages of ArrayLists compared to arrays are:
  
- The ArrayList size increases/decreases based on how much space the program needs to use
- The last element of an ArrayList is always at the index list.size()-1, unlike an array (which must be manually tracked)
- Shifting of elements when something is removed/added at a specific index is automatic, unlike arrays.

## Declaration
   
The declaration of an ArrayList is slightly different than an array. Like an array,
it is advised to specify the type of data the ArrayList would hold. This is indicated within the
< > symbols. It is important to note that ArrayLists CANNOT directly hold primitive data types
(e.g. int, float, long, char, etc.).
   
Luckily, there are things in Java called wrapper classes,
which are often used to help with indirectly dealing with primitive data types. For example, the
Java.lang.Integer wrapper class is a class for the primitive type int. When handling ArrayLists or any class
which extends the List interface, the data type specified in < > is the name of the corresponding wrapper
class.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    ArrayList<Integer> nameOfArrayListObject;
    // where E is the data type

    // ex1. An ArrayList of Integers
    ArrayList<Integer> integerArrayList; 
{% endhighlight %}
          
## Instantiation
   
To instantiate an ArrayList, like an array, the "new" keyword must be used. This creates a new
ArrayList object. The ArrayList class has 3 different constructors: a default constructor, a constructor
that takes in an int to set the initial size, and a constructor that takes in another that takes in
a Collection of the same or subclass data types of the elements of the ArrayList.

{% highlight java linenos %}
    // note: E stands for a constant datatype

    // this first method of creating an ArrayList constructs an empty ArrayList with an
    // initial capacity of size 10.
    ArrayList<E> nameOfList1 = new ArrayList<>();
    
    // the second method of creating an ArrayList contructs an ArrayList of a given size,
    // in its parameters.
    ArrayList<E> nameOfList2 = new ArrayList<>(initialCapacity);
    
    // the third method of creating an ArrayList constructs an ArrayList from a passed in
    //  Collection or any of its subclasses, of a data type which is a subclass of the data type
    //  of the ArrayList.
    ArrayList<E> nameOfList3 = new ArrayList<>(Collection <? extends E> c); 
{% endhighlight %}

Additionally, looking at the ArrayList class' heirarchy tree, you could call ArrayLists
generically as a List. We will get to this later when we talk about the List interface.
Lets look at this example:

{% highlight java linenos %}
    List <Integer> list1 = new ArrayList<>();
    ArrayList <Integer> list2 = new ArrayList<>();
{% endhighlight %}
          
    
## List <E> Interface

The List <E> Interface provides to classes that implement it, to hold a list of
type E elements. There are certain key aspects of the List < E > Interface, such as its
important methods, which will be discussed.

- `int size()` will return the size of the list
- `E get(int index)` will return the element at that index
- `E set(int index, E item)` will replace the current item at index with the new item
- `E remove(int index)` will remove the element at that index, and decreases the index value of the right-side elements by 1
- `boolean add(E element)` will add the new element to the end of the list, and return true if the list was modified
- `void add(int index, E element)` will add the new element at the specified index, and increase the index value of the right-side elements by 1

   
## Traversal

Here is an example of traversing an ArrayList:
{% highlight java linenos %}
    public class ArraylistDemos{
        public static boolean findElement(ArrayList<String> list, String flag){
            for(int i = 0; i < list.size(); i++){
                if (list.get(i).equals(flag)) return true;
            }
            return false;
        }
    }  
{% endhighlight %}    
         

## The foreach loop - ArrayLists
   
When using a foreach loop for ArrayLists, its syntax is almost identical as using a foreach loop for an array.
Here's a quick example:

{% highlight java linenos %}
public class ForeachListDemo{
    public static void main(String [] args){
        ArrayList<String> arr = new ArrayList<>();
        arr.add("This");
        arr.add("is");
        arr.add("the");
        arr.add("real");
        arr.add("life.");
        for(String s : arr){
            System.out.println(s);
        }
    }
}  
{% endhighlight %}
         
 