---
layout: post
title: The Issue with Big Tech's Monopolization
description: Trump's Twitter, misinformation, and more
date: 2021-01-20 11:12:00-0400
---

Shortly after the Capitol attacks on Jan 6, Twitter permanently banned Trump's personal Twitter account. 
And people were vocal - reactions were quick, mixed, yet predictable. Many of Trump’s opponents were ecstatic. 
The firehose of dangerous rhetoric that plagued their last four years was finally shut off.

As for the Trump-apologetic right, they saw it as an Orwellian nightmare, an attack on free speech. A tyrannical deep-state collusion. “We are living Orwell’s 1984. Free-speech no longer exists in America. It died with big tech and what’s left is only there for a chosen few,” Trump Jr. tweeted. “This is absolute insanity!”

Left or right, people immediately bandwagoned and took sides against each other. But we should not have been so quick to do so. If someone told you that Silicon Valley just silenced the President of the United States, you’d raise some questions before jumping to conclusions.

Let’s start with an easy one: "Is this Constitutional?" Well, nothing in the United States Constitution prohibits a private company from enforcing its terms of use. In fact, parts of the Constitution encourages businesses to do so. So, it’s safe to conclude that Twitter acted fully within their legal rights. It's important to note, Trump was not cut off from the public - he could've still spoken to the American people through T.V, the Whitehouse press room, even the POTUS twitter account. It wasn't as if there were no alternatives.

Now, a harder question: “Does censoring a head of state set a dangerous precedent?” Of course. But so does allowing that same leader to use their platform to blast racist and misogynistic paranoia and spread misinformation over the course of many years. So does inciting a violent insurrection in the Capitol Building, and afterwards labelling the domestic terrorists as patriots. Here’s one of his Tweets, after the Capitol attack: “The 75,000,000 great American Patriots who voted for me, AMERICA FIRST, and MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN, will have a GIANT VOICE long into the future. They will not be disrespected or treated unfairly in any way, shape or form!!!”

Regardless of your personal views on the matter, Twitter's action was objectively a suppression of speech, and actions like these were bound to cause deep ripples in our society. It didn’t take long for Twitter's bold move to spark a swift crackdown on social media platforms. Aside from Trump’s following bans on Facebook, Snapchat, and Youtube, over 70,000 online accounts related to QAnon, conspiracy theorists, and the alt-right were deactivated. Tech giants like Amazon, Google, and Apple partnered up to collectively shut down the right-wing Twitter alternative, Parler, by removing their cloud-hosting services and the product from their app stores. Without an alternative to their services, Parler was forced to completely shut down (though they have since returned online).

Without question, a crackdown on hate speech and violent rhetoric was long overdue. But there are two pressing concerns with it.

Number 1: it further separates an already divided world. Silencing people for expressing their own views permanently removes opportunities to listen, clarify, and re-evaluate opinions. It creates more resentment, and pushes those who believe differently into a dark corner where their views will never be challenged, let alone listened to. This crackdown inherently fails at changing people’s minds - echo chambers will only grow stronger, and silenced people will think “I’m being banned for telling the truth.” If anything, it only reinforces beliefs.

Number 2: look at Big Tech’s power. They just demonstrated their ability to mute hundreds of thousands of voices. While it’s absolutely within their legal rights to do so, their monopolization of web services show how they have the power to establish a techopoly, controlling who has a voice in today’s market. They’ve created platforms that’ve led to rampant misinformation and mental health issues, while silently establishing themselves the new arbiters of the Internet.

By cementing themselves as the only accessible gateway to the web, they now wield the power to dictate a commons that should be accessible to everyone. If their power is left unchecked, the right’s far fetched claims of an “Orwellian nightmare” may quickly become a reality. It just won’t be through an oppressive government. Rather, the indomitable unity of corporate giants.

So what do we do? What can be done to bring those back into reality? What can we do to break up these tech monopolies?

Here are some policy changes lawmakers are considering. One action that the Biden Administration has been touting is repealing Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, the federal law that protects social media companies from being sued for illegal content. This is a provision that allowed these companies to scale quickly without risk. Another option is implementing policies similar to the ones in the UK/EU. They include proposals where large tech companies can be fined up to 6% of their annual global revenue if they don’t increase transparency in their algorithms and act to counter societal harms.

But these are all long term, government-reliant solutions. What can we do, as students?

There’s a famous law of propaganda: “Repeat a lie often enough and it becomes the truth.” With how connected the world is through the web, lies spread rampantly and quickly. So it’s our job to help slow and stop its spread. When we browse social media, there will always be posts that trigger emotions, provoke emotion-based reactions, and encourage impulsive reposting.

When we see stuff like this, it’s our duty to think rationally and stay reserved. Don’t bandwagon and fall for the clickbait. These social media algorithms are designed to show you content you’ll be interested in. So do the research. Avoid acting on impulse, and on baseless words that might make you angry, scared, or upset. Report incorrect facts, and seek to reeducate. Don’t help normalize lies.

We’re the generation that grew up with the Internet, and are entering adulthood in an unprecedented time. In a world filled with misinformation, your ability to think rationally and carefully will be absolutely paramount.
